% Improving Locality of Unstructured Mesh Algorithms on GPUs

\noindent Unstructured mesh solvers, particularly applied to the solution of 
finite difference, finite volume or finite element algorithms, form the basis 
of numerical simulation applications in a vast area of important scientific 
domains, from modeling the flow of blood in the body, the flow past an aircraft, 
to ocean circulation and the simulation of Tsunamis. Significant computational 
resources are required for the execution of numerical algorithms on these highly 
detailed (usually three-dimensional) meshes. The solution involves repeatedly 
iterating over millions of elements (such as mesh edges, nodes, etc.) to reach 
the desired accuracy or resolution. The key distinguishing feature of these 
applications is that operations over mesh elements make use of explicit 
connectivity information between elements to access data defined on neighboring 
elements. This is in contrast to the use of stencils in structured-mesh 
applications where the regular geometry of the mesh implicitly provides the 
connectivity information. As such, iterations over unstructured-meshes lead to 
highly irregular patterns of data accesses over the mesh, characterized by 
indirect array accesses. For example, computations over the mesh involve 
iterating over elements of a set (e.g. faces), performing the same computations, 
on different data, accessing/modifying data on the set which they operate on 
(e.g. fluxes defined on the faces), or, using indirections accessing/modifying 
data defined on other sets (such as coordinate data on connected vertices). 
These indirect accesses are particularly difficult to parallelize when multiple 
threads may try to modify the same data, leading to data races. 

Previous work has utilized one of three approaches for handling data races 
during parallelization~\cite{LULESH:spec,miniaero}: (1) use coloring where the 
iteration set is ``colored'' such that no two iterations of the same color 
modify the same mesh element indirectly, followed by parallel execution of the 
iterations with the same color, (2) use large temporary datasets to stage 
increments without race conditions, and a separate step to gather the 
increments, or (3) use atomics to handle race conditions. However, the amount 
of parallelism, and especially the data locality available to be exploited with 
the above methods have become increasingly limited on modern and emerging 
massively parallel multi-core and many-core architectures. The performance gains 
have been limited particularly on many-core processors such as GPUs with 
thousands of low-power cores, but with modest memory-bandwidth. Thus, reducing 
data movement and exploiting memory locality during execution is vital on such 
devices. On GPUs, the first two techniques, coloring or using temporary 
datasets, end up with poor data locality as one cannot have good data reuse in 
both reading data as well as writing data without conflicts. The third method, 
atomics, are much more expensive operations than regular memory transactions and 
therefore usually lead to low throughput. 

In this paper we explore novel data-movement avoiding and locality exploiting 
algorithms for improving performance of unstructured-mesh applications on GPUs. 
Identifying that the throughput of memory transactions is the main bottleneck, 
we demonstrate how superior execution strategies can be obtained by utilizing 
a combination of techniques from (1) element reordering at thread-block level, 
(2) use of GPU shared memory as an explicitly managed cache and (3) use of 
partitioning algorithms for thread-block formation. We show how these allow us 
to maximize data re-use to the higher-bandwidth shared memory, and optimize 
access patterns to both shared and GPU global memory. More specifically, we make 
the following contributions:
\begin{enumerate}
\item We adopt a caching mechanism on the GPU that loads indirectly accessed 
elements into GPU shared memory. Then use a two-level ``hierarchical coloring'' 
approach to avoid data races, but improve locality over traditional global 
coloring. 

\item We design a reordering algorithm based on graph partitioning that 
increases data reuse within a thread block, also further increasing shared 
memory utilization. 

\item Finally, we apply the above techniques and optimizations to a number of 
representative unstructured-mesh applications to investigate performance on 
modern GPUs, contrasting performance improvements over the state-of-the-art. 
\end{enumerate}

\noindent We demonstrate how the above locality-exploiting algorithms provide 
performance improvements of up to 75\% compared to the state-of-the-art on the 
latest NVIDIA Pascal and Volta GPUs. The algorithms are implemented as an 
open-source software library~\cite{opt-library} which can be used for improving 
performance of existing or new unstructured-mesh applications. 

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: the remainder of Section
\ref{introduction} introduces the basic concepts of unstructured meshes, 
numerical methods based on them and a discussion on related works, Section 
\ref{parallelisation-on-gpu} describes our optimized algorithms and the 
motivation leading to the design. Section \ref{performance} presents the 
performance analysis of the algorithms with experimental results. Finally, in 
Section \ref{conclusion}, we present conclusions from this research. 
%\ref{library-implementation} contains a brief description of the structure of 
%the open source library.


\subsection{Background}\label{sec:background}
\input{background}

\subsection{Related Work}\label{sec:related-works}
\input{relatedwork}

